Using the Tree Configuration File

The tree configuration gives you much greater control of the tree types and sizes the TGC Golf Tool adds to your course.

The configuration file needs to be named "trees.json" and be located in the same directory as your course files.  It can be modified with any text editor.  If the file isn't found the tool will use the default values.

Note, different themes will require different values for some of the configuration values.  It is recommended that you keep a a copy of theme specific config files and then rename the one you want to use as "trees.json"


Tree Types:

The types of trees TGC uses are defined by numbers ranging from 0 (default) to up to 24, and vary based on the theme of the course.  A Google Doc listing the types for each theme can be found at: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Bs4tccWmqcM7NKebsszCG24UoQ7dslzO7aqI1Me4lVA/edit#gid=0

You can select which tree types are added to your course by including their associated number to the 'normal_trees' or 'skinny_trees' list in the configuration file.  To exclude certain tree types simply omit them from each list.


Normal vs. Skinny Trees:

Skinny trees are generally conifers (e.g. Pines) and palm trees as a default.  When using lidar data, the tool detects the height and width of each tree.  If the height to width ratio is greater than a certain value, the tool will insert one of the skinny trees from the list instead of a normal tree.

By default, the tool inserts skinny trees if the height to width ratio is greater than 2.5.  You can change this value by modifying the 'skinny_h_r_ratio' value in the configuration file.  Increasing this value will result in more normal trees and fewer skinny trees being inserted, and lower the value will result in the opposite.


Overall Tree Sizes:

The default tree in TGC is defined with a height and radius of 1.0, whereas tree sizes in lidar data are stored in real life units.  The tool converts the lidar tree sizes to TGC sizes based on a range of default values, which you can change in the config file.

The 'min_height_scale' and 'max_height_scale' values define the range of tree sizes for your course, with the shortest and tallest lidar trees assigned the min and max scale values, respectively.

You can increase or decrease the overall tree sizes and/or range of tree sizes created by changing these values.

Similarly, the radius scale values work in the same way as the height values.


Tree Sizes by Type:

You can make specific tree types larger or smaller by modifying the 'size_multiplier' values in the configuration file.  For example, if you wanted all of a specific tree type to be half as tall you would change the associated value to 0.5.

There should be a value in the list for each tree type up to the highest number tree in your normal and skinny lists, including any omitted types.  E.g. if your highest numbered tree is 16, you would need 17 numbers in the list (including a value for tree type 0), even if you omitted tree type 4.


Tree Size Normalization:

TGC is inconsistent with the sizes of trees across the types.  If you insert a variety of trees, all at the default height (1.0), their displayed heights will vary a fair amount.  Further, their apparent sizes aren't necessarily consistent with typical heights of the trees in nature.  The 'tree_normalize' values are an additional height multiplier to make tree sizes more consistent.  For example, if lidar detects two trees to be 30 feet high, both of which in turn are scaled to a TGC height value of 1.1, and are inserted as two different tree types, their apparent heights will not be the same.  The normalization value will scale these trees to appear as the same height.

The size multiplier is likely preferable for changing heights across tree types, although either can be used.  For example, if you wanted to make five different tree types 10% taller, changing their size multiplier values to 1.1 would be easier than increasing each normalization value by 10%.


Comment:

The comment included in the configuration field lists the tree types and is only included for convenience.  JSON does not allow text comments, so it's written in a JSON compatible format.


A Use Case:

I am recreating an older course that has mostly mature trees, more than half of which are pines and spruces.  I have good lidar data and want to use the rustic theme.  The tool defaults to 12 normal and 3 skinny trees for this theme.

The initial course output had a wide variety of trees, with a small percentage of which were pines and spruces.  Additionally, the overall size of the trees ranged considerably, which is inconsistent with a mature course.

Using the tool, I narrowed the min and max height values to 0.6 and 1.2, respectively.  I used these same numbers for the radius values as well.  This narrowed the range of tree sizes nicely.

I next decided to decrease the variety of trees, including only oaks, elms and maples for my normal trees and ponderosa and spruce for my skinny trees.  The number of skinny trees as compared to the normal trees was too low as well, so I changed the skinny height/radius ration from 2.5 down to 1.8.  This change gave me a really nice mix of trees that better reflected the real course.

I then viewed the trees from some of the tee boxes and fairways and it seemed a little overgrown.  I also noticed that my two skinny tree types were a bit shorter than the normal trees.  I changed the size multiplier for all the normal trees to 0.8 and kept the skinny trees at 1.0.

The end result was a course that needed very little in the way of tweaking some of the trees.